okay
so um
we're going to continue our discussion
of
one m or two
of the riemann integral
which remember from from
you know the discussion at the end of
the last lecture is a theory
of
you know area underneath the graph of a
function okay
so what is that theory
the theory is built up as follows
given a continuous function f
so this is just kind of a refresher on
the definitions i introduced last time
a partition is just
um you know
points between
just breaking up the interval from a to
b into
points into little sub intervals
with the norm of this partition being
kind of the length of the longest sub
interval
xc which we refer to as a tag is just a
set of points with one
lying in each of these sub intervals
so for me let's take them all to be
the right endpoint of
these intervals
and then associated to a
tagged partition which is a pair x and
xc
we associated a riemann sum which is f
evaluated at these points times the
length of the interval
and
so if we draw the graph of a function f
say in this picture
this
number this riemann sum would then
be equal to the area of these
three boxes here
okay
and so our theory of riemann integration
or our theory of the area underneath the
curve
is built on
you know the following goal which is to
show that
as
these partitions get finer and finer as
the norm of these partitions get goes to
zero
these riemann sums should converge to
some number
and that number which we call the
riemann integral of f we interpret as
the area
underneath the graph of f
so the first goal
the main goal really
to start off with is to show
that this is a reasonable
that this is actually true that
these riemann sums do in fact converge
to some number
as they become finer and finer
for a given continuous function
so that is the the main theorem which i
think is
going to be the main thing that we
proved today
so theorem
of the riemann integral
which is the following
f be
a continuous function from a
b to r
which remember this is the notation we
used from last time
let me
move my picture over here
then
there exists
a unique
real
number which we denote
as the usual
symbol integral a b f of x dx
with the following property
for every
sequence of partitions
x r
c r
such that the norm
of this of these partitions is going to
zero
as r goes to infinity so
these partitions are getting finer and
finer if the norm is going to zero
right remember the norm is the length of
the longest sub interval i have
so
for all sequence of partitions can with
norms converging to zero
we have that the limit
of the riemann sums exists
and equals this number
which we refer to as the riemann
integral of f
okay
so you know there's a lot to unpack here
uh first off you know what this
number the integral from a b to f of x
dx this property that it has is no
matter what sequence of partitions you
take as long as they're becoming finer
and finer
this limit actually exists and it equals
the same number it equals this number uh
integral a b f of x dx so i could take
two different sequences of partitions
becoming finer and finer look at the
riemann sums
and
those
two sequences of riemann sums converge
and they converge to the same number
uh which i again which we denote by
integral a b f of x dx
right the riemann integral of f
and so it's this number
which we interpret as the area
underneath the graph of f
okay
all right so our main goal for today is
to prove this theorem
[Applause]
so
um first off uh
there's uh two parts of the statement
here there exists a unique real number
which we denoted by that with this
property
um uniqueness is immediate right if i
have two real numbers
such that
uh
for all sequence of partitions with norm
going to zero the limit of the riemann
sums equals that limit
well
uh
limits of sequences are unique and
therefore those two numbers have to be
the same okay so uniqueness is clear
it's really the existence part uh that
we have to prove that there exists
a real number so that no matter what
uh sequence of partitions we take the
corresponding riemann sums converges to
zero as long as they become the the
partitions become finer and finer
okay
okay now for
um now we're not going to prove this
theorem just yet
uh we need some facts uh
that will be used in the proof so we're
going to
put off proving this theorem uh for a
few minutes
and uh first prove some necessary facts
so
um let me first
define a useful
um
metric
or number associated to or function
associated to a continuous function
called the modulus of continuity so
for f
continuous function
and ada positive
we define
the modulus
continuity omega f
of eta this is equal to
the supremum
of
f of x minus f of y an absolute value
such that the absolute value of x minus
y is less than or equal to eight
okay
so what is this
modulus of continuity measure it
measures
you know
given
if i take any two points less than or
equal to eta and distance
uh and i look at f of x minus f of y and
absolute value
and take the soup over all that that
gives me um the modulus of continuity
now for example
let's do the simplest example possible f
of x equals
ax plus b
then
what do we get
f of x
minus f of y
this is equal to
a times
x minus y
so if
x minus y is less than or equal to eta
we get that
f of x minus f of y
in absolute value
is less than or equal to well i mean
it's equal to
a times x minus y
is less than or equal to a times
eta
right
and therefore
absolute value of a times eta is an
upper bound
for this set for this function
and it's also achieved right if i take
absolute value of x minus y equal to eta
then this will be equality all right so
what i'm saying is is that for this
example
for f equals ax plus b
the
modulus of continuity is equal to a
absolute value of a times eta
okay
now something to note here is that for
this guy right here as eta goes to zero
the modulus of continuity goes to zero
as well
and
this is not special to this function in
fact is true for all continuous
functions
this is somehow so let me state the
theorem and then give you an
interpretation of it
so let me call this theorem one
so we're all f
continuous on the closed and bounded
interval in a b
limit as eta goes to zero
of omega f of eta
equals zero
okay
now um
so
let me make one more comment here maybe
this will also um just to connect to
something we did earlier
right which follows immediately from the
definition of this uh guy
that
for all x and y
this is
true
okay
and therefore you know you should think
of if i'm trying to make this small
then the modulus of continuity is
something that controls
how close f of x and f of y are together
so somehow continuity is controlled by
this function the modulus of continuity
right so if this goes to zero then
uh
i mean if as this goes to zero this goes
to zero then somehow i'm saying um f of
x and f of y are very close together
all right
so again the modulus of continuity is a
way of
is a way of measuring continuity of a
function okay that's one way to think of
it
um
all right so
let's prove this
um this is a limit statement and what
we're going to do is we'll just prove it
the old-fashioned way let epsilon be
positive
um what do we know about functions which
are continuous on a closed and bounded
interval well they're also uniformly
continuous right
so
since f is continuous on this closed and
bounded interval
f is
uniformly continuous
this means that there exists
delta 0 positive
such that um
for all x and y
x and y less than delta zero implies
that
f of x minus f of y
is less than
you put epsilon over 2. i'm going to
give myself a little space here
okay
so
just to recall you know what we're
trying to do here in terms of the
definition of what this means we're
trying to show that for all
epsilon positive there exists a delta
positive such that
such that for all eta
you know eight is actually a positive
number here so
implies omega f of
eta is less than epsilon
okay
um
all right so
this is what we're trying to prove we
know that for a continuous function it's
uniformly continuous and therefore there
exists this delta zero so that when x
minus y is less than delta zero f of x
minus f of y is less than epsilon over
two for all x y in the interval
okay
so
now let me use
that so basically i'm going to choose
delta to be this delta zero
i mean the delta i need for this
and now let me show that it works
suppose eta is less than delta which
remember is delta zero
then
if
x minus y is less than
eta
which again is less than
less than or equal to eta which is less
than delta zero i get that
f of x minus f of y
is less than epsilon over 2.
right that's i mean basically i just
rewrote what i had right there and
therefore
this implies that epsilon over 2
is an upper bound
for the set
f of x
minus f of y
x minus y
is less than eta
which implies that the supremum of this
set which is by definition
uh
so i'm just going to put
brackets here
i hope that's clear that i'm referring
to this set here when i put that here
that the supremum of this set has to be
less than or equal to this upper bound
which is less than epsilon
okay so we've proven that
if eta is less than delta
then
the modulus of continuity of f
of eta
is less than epsilon and therefore
this is what we wanted to prove
okay
all right so
that's one fact that i need
uh that this modulus of continuity which
remember is the supremum of the
difference of f of x and f of y as long
as x and y are bounded by eta that this
converges to zero as eta converges to
zero for all continuous functions okay
and this is this is key in in showing
um
and showing that
the riemann integral exists for
continuous functions
so theorem two is the following so this
is uh gonna tell us
kind of how
two riemann sums are
comparable if one
partition is finer than the other
so
if i have two
tag partitions
and of a b such that
x prime is a subset of x so this means
that
x prime so this is a partition a breakup
of a b that contains all the points of x
and more okay so it's a finer partition
so and we refer to x prime as a
refinement of the partition x
all right so we have two partitions one
is finer than the other
and a continuous function f
then
we can estimate the difference in the
riemann sums
this is less than or equal to
the modulus of continuity of f
evaluated at the norm of the
coarser
partition times the length of the
interval
okay
okay so this says as long as uh
one way to think about it is if
the
partition x is uh very fine and then i
take a finer partition that's not going
to change
the riemann sum too much because
remember this is converging to zero as
the norm of the partition how fine it is
or uh or you can think how coarse it is
is going to zero um
okay so the idea is very simple it's
just gonna take me a little bit just to
write down
so um
so
like i said
this partition being contained in the
other means
this partition has all the points in x
and then some more so we're going to
break it we're going to break these
partitions up into
uh or at least this one up to up into uh
parts where
it's points in x and then plus the extra
one so for k equals 1 to n
so let me draw a picture first and then
i'll define the concepts that
i have so here we have the partition
points
of
of x
okay
and
above i'm going to write now
uh i used to write xc but i'm going to
write the partition points
corresponding to x prime so this should
be x prime
sub l for some l because remember this
one's comb can turn uh
that
is com
this one is
contained in the other
so
this partition point will be x prime sub
l for some l and then i'll have some
other ones
and so on until i reach the last
partition point from x prime which is
contained in this sub interval
uh
from the partition x
okay
so i let
y
with a k upper
so this is not so
this is equal to the partition
x
so k minus 1 equals x prime l
l plus 1
up until i get to
some partition point x sub m which
equals
x sub k
okay so this is just the part of the
partition x prime contained in this sub
interval
where these are partition points in x
okay
and then i'm going to write eta
k this will be
the tags that come with
these points so
okay
so what i want to
draw attention to is that
the tag partition x prime
c prime this is equal to let me write it
this way since these are sets what i
mean by
um let me write it
as the union of the tagged partitions
and also this ada has nothing to do with
the ada from before all right i'm just
using this as notation
okay so
the full partition of x prime and xc
prime tag partition is equal to the
union of these smaller partitions of
xk minus 1 and xk as k runs from 1 to to
k okay i hope that's clear
all right
all right so now let's compare
the part of the riemann sum for x exe on
this interval so remember somewhere
sitting in here is the tag
corresponding to the
uh the k tag for this guy
uh let's compare it to the part of the
riemann sum for the x prime of c prime
also coming from this interval okay
in fact let me
make one more uh remark that since this
tag partition is equal to the union of
these tagged
partitions
this implies that
the riemann sum corresponding to this
tag partition is equal to
the sum of
the riemann sums
corresponding to these
uh
partitions of these intervals x k minus
1 and x k all right so these are not
partitions of a b but they are
partitions of x k minus 1 and x k
all right
so i hope all this is clear
again i'm just breaking this uh these
two riemann this riemann sum up into
parts where now i'm looking at what's
happening between each of the partition
points x sub k minus 1 and x sub k
coming from the original
coarser partition x
all right
now we compute so
[Applause]
if i look at
so this is a part of
the riemann sum
of x c
from this interval
minus the part of
the riemann sum for x prime x c prime
coming from this interval
now this is equal to
f of xck
and so let me just
rewrite this sum here
x sub k minus x sub k minus 1 this is
equal to
sum from k equals
let's say j equals l
plus one
to m
x prime sub
j minus x subtract minus one so of the
smaller ones that are in there
this is just a telescoping sum so all i
pick up is x sub j prime sub m which is
x sub k
minus the first one which is x sub x
prime sub l which is x of k minus one
minus and then this is by definition
equal to j equals l plus one
m
f of uh
prime
j
x uh prime j minus x
minus one
okay
so now i combine and then absolute value
sign on the outside
and then i combine these two
and
so this is less this is equal to
sum from j equals l plus 1
to k of
k minus
j
times x
prime j
minus x prime j minus one
absolute value
now by the triangle inequality the
absolute value of the sum is less than
or equal to the sum of the absolute
values so to save myself writing
i'm going to bring the absolute values
inside
okay
now x now x c sub k and x c sub j
they're both in the interval x sub k x
of k minus one so
and by what i wrote up there
you know another way of uh or what
follows simply from the definition of
the modulus of continuity this is less
than or equal to um
omega f
of
x sub k
sub k minus 1.
times
x times j minus x prime j minus 1.
and this equals
now this this doesn't depend on j so
this is again just a telescoping sum so
i just pick up
times
x
okay
so that's for one piece and now i just
add them up
then
i look at
and
so like i said this is equal to the sum
of these terms that look like this from
k equals 1
to n
this is equal to the sum of terms like
this from k equals 1 to n that's what i
wrote up there and so if i apply the
triangle inequality this is less than or
equal to sum from k equals 1 to n
of f of
x c k times x k minus x k minus 1
minus
s of f
uh
eta
okay
which um
you know i have this estimate right here
i've already estimated
all right so
i started off with this
and i showed it was less than or equal
to this so now let me stick that
estimate into here
less than or equal to sum from
k equals
1 to n
omega f
of x
k minus x k minus 1 times x k minus x k
minus 1.
now the x k's so
another thing which you should notice
about the modulus of continuity is if
i have
something
here and then something bigger this set
gets bigger
and therefore this suit gets bigger so
another property of the modulus of
continuity is that it's increasing right
this just follows from you know looking
at the definition there there's more
points to take a soup over if this thing
gets bigger so um
implies
okay
so
all of these lengths of these sub
intervals
the distance between partition points
those are all bounded by
the norm of
the partition the biggest one so this is
less than or equal to
sum from k equals 1 to n omega f of
norm
of x times
xk minus xk minus 1.
and now this doesn't depend on k so i
just pick up the sum from k equals 1 to
n of this
which is a telescoping sum all i pick up
is x sub n
minus x sub 0 which is just b minus a
which is the estimate we wanted to prove
okay
okay so now i'm going to do something
that's sacrilegious as far as board work
goes
and
i'm going to erase this board and prove
the next theorem on it because i want to
keep what i prove
or at least a statement of what i prove
around for um
when we finally tackle the proof of the
[Music]
existence of the riemann integral so
this is
in permanent form
on
in digital form and also
in the notes
also i should mention we're not
following the textbook now
so
you have to
read the lecture notes or
watch the lecture
all right so um
this theorem here theorem two allowed us
to
compare two riemann sums
as long as one partition is finer than
the other okay
but
there's a simple trick which we can now
use to prove uh
how to compare any two riemann sums
for any two partitions so we have the
following
theorem three
if xc and
now there are any tag partitions
and
f is a continuous function
then
if i look at the riemann sum of
this guy
and then
compare it to
the riemann sum of the other guy
this is less than or equal to
the
modulus of continuity evaluated at
the first partition plus
modulus of continuity
applied to the second partition
times
the length of the interval
okay so still it's what does this say
this says that
if i take two very fine partitions
okay so that
the norms are very small and therefore
the modulus of continuity evaluated at
these norms are small remember the
modulus of continuity converges to zero
as the argument goes to zero so if i
take two very fine partitions then
the riemann sums are very close together
the riemann sums barely change and so
now we have some hope to see that um
you know sequences of riemann sums do in
fact converge
okay so how do we prove this it's a
simple trick using
the previous theorem
to find
a third partition to be
the common refinement of these two so
take this partition
and union it with the second one
and take
a new set of tags to be the union
of the two tags
right
so all the partition points of x and x
prime i throw them together to get a new
partition x double prime
okay
and then the tags uh as well
then
x
backwards
this new partition is finer than x
it's finer than x prime and therefore by
theorem two
we have this estimate
which we can use so if i look at
the difference of the riemann sums
and i add and subtract uh
the riemann sum corresponding to
uh x double prime and xc double prime
and then i use the triangle inequality
so i'm doing two steps here i don't want
to
add and subtract the riemann sum
corresponding to
and then apply the triangle inequality
now for this one for both of these i can
now insert this estimate here from
theorem two where what's uh
the
modulus of continuity being evaluated at
it's being evaluated at the coarser
partition so this one is less than or
equal to
so x double prime is contained in x so
this is less than or equal to the
modulus of continuity evaluated at x
prime times b minus a
and then
for this one
x prime is coarser than x double prime
this this one is contained in x prime so
plus the modulus of continuity
evaluated at x prime
times b minus a
and that's what we wanted to prove
okay
all right so now we're in a position to
prove um
this theorem of the riemann integral
and so what we're going to do is we're
first going to come up with a candidate
for what the integral could be
and then we're gonna show that's the
actual that that candidate satisfies
um
the conclusion uh or this property that
no matter what partition i take with
norms converging to zero
the um
um
riemann sums converge to this number
okay so first we have to come up with a
candidate number
all right so
first take any
so let's fix some partition of
for the greek letter aficionados out
there this is zeta
would this be a partition of
a b
with
norm
converting to zero as r goes to infinity
okay you can always come up with some
partition
so this
should say be a tag
you can always come up with one you know
at least one uh partition
or sequence of partitions
so this is uh be a sequence
of tag partitions
okay now this is finally right so you
can always come up with a sequence of
tag partitions
of a b with the norms converging to zero
you know take the first one to b just
the whole interval
so just a
left endpoint right endpoint next one
add the midpoint
that's now three partition points now
add the midpoints
of the previous uh
two intervals you had now add the
midpoints of the intervals you had
before and so on and that will build up
a sequence of partitions with norm
converging to zero
so
so i have this uh
fixed sequence of tag partitions
and i claim that the riemann sums
converge for this guy
all right so claim
one
the sequence of riemann sums these are
this is a sequence of of numbers now
okay
so it converges to some number
um
we're going to prove this by showing
it's cauchy
remember cautious sequences of real
numbers
always converge that's
this completeness property of
the real numbers
okay
so there's no other way to do this then
uh
using the definition the epsilon m
definition
so let epsilon be positive
so by theorem
one there exists
a delta positive
such that
if
eta is less than delta
i should say so we know that the modulus
of continuity for f converges to zero as
eta goes to zero so for all eta less
than delta
um
omega f
of eta is less than um
epsilon over 2 times b minus a
okay let me put a star by this guy
now since
the norms of these
partitions is
are converging to 0
there exists
natural number m0 such that
for all r bigger than or equal to m0
the norm
is less than
less than delta
okay
and thus
for all r bigger than or equal to m0
if i look at
the modulus of continuity evaluated at
this uh norm
of this partition so the norm of this
partition is less than delta
and if i stick that into the modulus of
continuity anything i stick into the
modulus of continuity which is less than
delta which this is i should be less
than epsilon over two
um
times b minus a
so really this is the the one i want to
star maybe not this one i mean i am
using this one to get it but this is the
the key point here
okay
so here we're just using the fact that
modulus of continuity converges to zero
as the argument converges to zero and
that the norms are converging to zero
okay
so
for uh
show sums koshi we have to now choose m
i'm going to choose m to be this m0
then
roll r
r prime bigger than or equal to m which
remember we've chosen to be m0
we have
that
the absolute value of s of f
x
r
minus
the riemann sum
now with r prime
absolute value
this is by
theorem
3 which we proved over there right
is bounded by the sum of the modulus of
continuities evaluated at the norms
times b minus a
and now
r and r prime are bigger than or equal
to m zero and so by star so this is this
line here this is by
theorem three
but now by star by our choice of m0 this
is less than
epsilon over 2
times b minus a
plus epsilon over 2
b minus a
times b minus a
this is uh now
by star
which equals epsilon
and therefore this sequence of uh
riemann sums
with respect to this one sequence
converges
okay
and so we've proven the claim
let me call the limit of this sequence
something i'm going to call it l or in
fact let's
let's call it i for integral
let i be
the limit as r goes to infinity of
oh
i think i messed up my
notation earlier sorry about that the
y's
and
x's and
c's should have been y's and zetas
so that should have been y
zeta
y
and then y here
y here
okay
now that's right
so
i
is defined to be the limit of these guys
so now we have to do one last thing in
order to prove the theorem
so i have this guy i have this this
number i and i claim now
that i satisfies the properties of the
theorem namely that if i take
any sequence of riemann sums or any
sequence of
uh tagged partitions take the riemann
sums that converges to i
we've just shown that there is one
that converges to i that's how i is
defined we took one partition
a sequence of tag partitions and showed
that the riemann sums converge
to some number i so this number i
depends on
the partition which i chose in the
beginning
now we want to show that this
i in fact has that property that no
matter what partition sequence of
partitions i take the riemann sums
converge to i okay so that's the second
and last thing i need to do to prove
this theorem
so claim
let x
be
now any
sequence of tag partitions
which are becoming finer and finer so
the with the norm converging to zero
then i want to show that
limit as r goes to infinity of
the riemann sums corresponding to
this
sequence of
partial sums i mean partial sums this
sequence of partitions
exists
and equals this number i which i
obtained from this one sequence of
partitions
so once i've proven this uh
like this is claim
two once i've proven this then i'm done
okay this number i is therefore
satisfies the properties of
um
satisfies that property that no matter
what sequence of partitions i take
the sequence of riemann sums with
respect to these partitions converges to
that number
of course here i'm calling it i but
we denote it by the integral from a b of
f of x dx
so to prove this
uh is not too difficult
using um what we have on the board so
remember i is the limit with respect to
this one
uh sequence of partitions and now we
have an arbitrary sequence of partitions
which we want to show
the riemann sums converge to this number
as well
so
with uh
y sub r or y r and zeta are you know the
partitions from before
we have
by
the triangle inequality
if i look at
the
riemann sum with respect to uh this
arbitrary partition now
subtract i i want to show this converges
to zero so uh i'm just going to bound
this by something that converges to zero
and then by you know the usual argument
with the squeeze theorem that implies
this thing converges to 0.
so
adding and subtracting
the riemann sum associated to the
partition y
and zetas this is less than or equal to
the triangle inequality
minus s
f
of
minus over
plus
now
minus i
and
so i'm almost there
this thing now i use
theorem three
so this is less than or equal to
um
times b minus a
plus
s sub f of
i sub r
minus i
okay
now
the norms of x
the norm of the x bar this is converging
to zero right
so this converges to
uh since the modulus of continuity goes
to zero as the argument goes to zero
this goes to 0 plus
remember the
same thing for this guy this also
converges to 0
plus and where's
how did we define i it was defined as
the limit of the riemann sums
corresponding to this first fixed
partition and therefore this thing in
absolute value converges to zero
as r converges
uh to infinity
all right so
the absolute value
of this thing
this riemann sum minus i
is bounded by something converging to
zero as r goes to infinity
and therefore by the squeeze theorem
we conclude that the limit as r goes to
infinity
of s
so
in other words no matter what sequence
of partitions we take
with norms converging to zero the
riemann sums converge to
the same number i
okay
and that's the end of the proof
so we uh
you know it took a lot of work to do
this i mean this is the work of riemann
so
um
who was
one you know one of the greatest
mathematicians of all time
um
you know virus ross was definitely one
of the greatest analysts of all time
riemann just as a mathematician in
general was probably was was one of the
greatest of all time
he not only did analysis
um
you know he applied analysis to
number theory this is the content of the
famous riemann hypothesis which
maybe you've heard about which is worth
a million dollars
it says something about the
zeros of
a certain function which then gives you
information about prime numbers
but
he also had
deep contributions to the foundations of
geometry
or i should say the foundations of
differential geometry
but um
truly some deep deep stuff going on
all right so now we have this um notion
of a riemann integral it's this number
integral a b
f of x dx which has this property no
matter what sequence of partitions i
take with norms converging to 0
the partial sums converge to
um
this number so i'm often going to denote
uh so
if you like this is some alternative
definite notation i'll use
instead of writing f of x
dx i may just write uh
you know integral a b f
okay um
so
you know this definition of the riemann
integral looks
looks terrifying if you want to actually
try and compute it
and it is so you know that's the miracle
of the fundamental theorem of calculus
is that it gives us a way to compute it
and that's why i'm not doing any
examples of computing it right now
but
we can still learn
about some properties of the riemann
integral
without that to start
so
so now we're moving on to some
properties
of the integral
and the first is that it
so this is a limiting process but this
limiting process is linear in f
okay if i look at riemann sums
of let's say f plus g
that's equal to the riemann sum of f
plus the riemann sum of g and therefore
since integration is a limit of this
uh
of riemann sums then
integration should also be linear as
well and that's the first
theorem
is the linearity of the riemann sum and
riemann integration
f and
g are in a b
and alpha
is in r
then
so first off
alpha f plus g that's going to be uh so
that should not be
in a b this should be a contin
continuous function it's the end of it's
the end of a long day okay so
sorry if i'm uh
losing a little steam here towards the
end anyways
alpha f plus g if f and g are continuous
this is a continuous function as well so
its integral is meaningful
and its integral is equal to alpha times
the integral of f
plus
the integral of g
okay
so what's the proof the proof is
basically what i said right before i
stated the theorem
that
riemann sums are linear in the function
so
and then we just take a limit
let
let's take a sequence of tag partitions
with norms converting to zero
as r goes to infinity
then
if i look at
the riemann sum
associated to alpha f plus g
it is easy to see from the definition
right this is a sum
from k equals 1 to
n so this is easy to see that this is
equal to alpha times
the riemann sum associated to f
plus
that guy
and now i just take a limit
so take
the limit as r goes to infinity the left
hand side converges to
the riemann integral of alpha f plus g
the limit as r goes to infinity
converges to
because we know limits
respect
linear operations
the limit of the right hand side is
going to be alpha times the limit plus
the limit
and therefore this is equal to alpha
times
integral a b f plus integral
a b g
okay
so like
differentiation uh
it's also
what one would call
a linear operator it takes a function
and spits something out but does it in a
linear way
so
um for us
uh
it takes a continuous function and spits
out a real number in a linear way and
that
the integral of alpha f plus g is equal
to alpha times f plus g just like
differentiation the derivative of alpha
f plus g if everything's differentiable
is equal to alpha times the derivative
of f plus the derivative of g
but riemann integration or the riemann
integral or integration in general
um
is
in some sense um
i don't want to say it's not miraculous
it still is a bit of a miracle that
exists that it exists for all continuous
functions
um
but it's not as destructive an operator
as taking the derivative
okay if you take as your baseline
continuous functions
right we did
last lecture
we constructed a continuous function
which is differentiable nowhere right
so
you know with differentiation you can
take a continuous function and not be
able to take its derivative anywhere
well with integration if you start off
with a continuous function you can
always take its integral
okay so somehow um
integration is is a
much more smoother process than
differentiation
all right so i think we'll stop there
you